Documentation plugin updates (#1622)
strapi/documentation: docusaurus/docs/dev-docs/plugins/documentation.md

title: API Documentation
displayed_sidebar: devDocsSidebar
description: By using Swagger UI, the API documentation plugin takes out most of your pain to generate your documentation.
---

# API Documentation

> Now that you have created your API it's important to document the available endpoints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Documentation plugin is useful to document the available endpoints once you created an API.
```

If installed, the Documentation plugin will inspect content types and routes found on all APIs in your project and any plugin specified in the configuration. The plugin will then programmatically generate documentation to match the [OpenAPI specification](https://swagger.io/specification/). The Documentation plugin generates the [paths objects](https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/blob/main/versions/3.1.0.md#paths-object) and [schema objects](https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/blob/main/versions/3.1.0.md#schema-object) and converts all Strapi types to [OpenAPI data types](https://swagger.io/docs/specification/data-models/data-types/).

> The generated documentation can be found in your app: `src/extensions/documentation/documentation/<version>/full_documentation.json`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The generated documentation can be found in your application at the following path: `src/extensions/documentation/documentation/<version>/full_documentation.json`.
```

</Tabs>

Once the plugin is installed, starting the application generates the API documentation.

## Swagger UI

> The documentation plugin visualizes your API using [Swagger UI](https://swagger.io/tools/swagger-ui/). To access the UI, select Documentation from the plugins menu and then click “Open Documentation”. Using Swagger UI you can view all of the endpoints available on your API and trigger API calls.

Reviewer 2: Not sure what you mean by the plugins menu

By default, your documentation will be accessible by anyone.

If you want to restrict the access to the API documentation you have to enable the **Restricted Access** option.

- Go to **Settings**, **Documentation**
- Toggle **Restricted Access** to `ON`
- Select a password in the `password` input
- Save your settings

The API documentation is now password restricted.

### Regenerate documentation

Documentation is not updated automatically. When you update your API you need to click on the **Regenerate** button for the documentation version you want to update. It regenerates to the specified version with the current API documentation.

## Configuration

> The documentation plugin is initialized with the following config and all the properties found here can be altered by providing new values on the documentation plugin's config object in `config/plugins.js`.

Reviewer 2: This sentence is a bit long to read

> ```jsx

Reviewer 2: don't you mean js? And it would be nice to show the full file, I'm not sure what I need to do with the object when I see this

  },
  security: [ { bearerAuth: [] } ]
}
```

### Create a new version of the documentation

To create a new version of your documentation, update the `version` key

```js title="config/plugin.js"

module.exports = {
  documentation: {
    enabled: true,
    config: {
      info: { version: "2.0.0" },
    },
  },
};
```

### Indicate which plugins need documentation generated

If you want plugins to be included in documentation generation they should be included in the `plugins` array on the `x-strapi-config`. By default this array is initialized with `["upload", "users-permissions"]`.

Similarly, if you do not want plugins to be included in documentation generation, provide an empty array.

```js title="config/plugins.js"

module.exports = {
  documentation: {
    enabled: true,
    config: {
      "x-strapi-config": {
        // Default
        plugins: ["upload", "users-permissions"],
        // Custom
        plugins: ["upload"],
        // Do not generate for plugins
        plugins: [],
      },
    },
  },
};
```

## Overriding the generated documentation

### Excluding from generation

> If you simply want to exclude certain apis or plugins from being generated you can use the `excludeFromGeneration` function on the override service

Reviewer 2: So for plugins should we use this or the plugins array?

Author: I guess in some cases you could do either or. If you wanted to provide an override from your plugin that mixes with the generated documentation then the plugin needs to be in the plugins array and excludeFromGeneration would not work for that case.

If you wanted to provide a plugin that completely replaces the generated documentation. You need to provide the override, exclude the plugin from generation, and provide the pluginOrigin so that the end user can opt-out of your plugin's documentation via the plugins array.

The real catch though is a plugin override that doesn't provide a pluginOrigin will cause the override to always run even if it is not in the plugins array. In that case though a user could go the extra mile and still get rid of the plugin using excludeFromGeneration.

It seems a bit confusing, you got any ideas? (for the docs or the code)

Reviewer 2: Thanks that does make it clearer. I do think it would be worth mentioning this difference in the docs, maybe in some kind of widget

Reviewer 2: as you want though, it doesn't block the PR

Reviewer: Thanks for the question and discussion :)
If you feel like it's worth being highlighted, you can mention it:
- in a `:::note` callout if it does not "break" anything or doesn't cause a weird or unexpected behavior with the software,
- or in a `:::caution` callout if it's somewhat unexpected or tricky

I think it's not blocking the PR, either. So it's up to you. If it's not included in the PR we can still add it eventually, if users feedback mention this part was unclear :)

Similarly, if you do not want plugins to be included in documentation generation, provide an empty array.

```js title="config/plugins.js"

module.exports = {
  documentation: {
    enabled: true,
    config: {
      "x-strapi-config": {
        // Default
        plugins: ["upload", "users-permissions"],
        // Custom
        plugins: ["upload"],
        // Do not generate for plugins
        plugins: [],
      },
    },
  },
};
```

## Overriding the generated documentation

### Excluding from generation

If you simply want to exclude certain apis or plugins from being generated you can use the `excludeFromGeneration` found on the documentation plugin’s `override` service in your application or plugin's [`register` lifecycle](http://localhost:8080/dev-docs/api/plugins/admin-panel-api#register).

**`excludeFromGeneration()`**

| Parameter | Type                       | Description                                              |
| --------- | -------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------- |
| `api`       | String or Array of Strings | The name of the API/plugin, or list of names, to exclude |

> **Example**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

| options.pluginOrigin          | String                    | The plugin that is registering the override                                                                   |
| options.excludeFromGeneration | String or Array of String | The name of the api/plugin, or list of names, to exclude                                                      |

:::note
Plugin developers providing an override should always specify the `pluginOrigin` options key, otherwise the override will run regardless of the user’s config.
:::

The Documentation plugin will use the registered overrides to replace the value of common keys on the generated documentation with what the override provides. If no common keys are found, the plugin will add new keys to the generated documentation.

If the override completely replaces what the documentation generates, you can specify that generation is no longer necessary by providing the names of the APIs or plugins to exclude in the options key array `excludeFromGeneration`.

If the override should only be applied to a specific version, the override must include a value for `info.version`. Otherwise, the override will run on all documentation versions.

> **Example:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

By default, your documentation will be accessible by anyone.

If you want to restrict the access to the API documentation you have to enable the **Restricted Access** option.

- Go to **Settings**, **Documentation**
- Toggle **Restricted Access** to `ON`
- Select a password in the `password` input
- Save your settings

The API documentation is now password restricted.

### Regenerate documentation

> There are two ways to update the documentation after making changes to your API. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are 2 ways to update the documentation after making changes to your API. 
```

1. Restart your application to regenerate the version of the documentation specified in the documentation plugin's config.

> 2. Go the documentation plugin page and click on the **regenerate** button for the documentation version you want to regenerate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Go to the Documentation plugin page and click the **regenerate** button for the documentation version you want to regenerate.
```

## Configuration

The documentation plugin is initialized with the following config. All of these properties can be altered by providing new values to the documentation plugin's config object in `config/plugins.js`.

```js
{
  openapi: '3.0.0',
  info: {
    version: '1.0.0',
    title: 'DOCUMENTATION',
    description: '',
    termsOfService: 'YOUR_TERMS_OF_SERVICE_URL',
    contact: {
      name: 'TEAM',
      email: 'contact-email@something.io',
      url: 'mywebsite.io'
    },
    license: {
      name: 'Apache 2.0',
      url: 'https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.html'
    },
  },
  'x-strapi-config': {
		// Leave empty to ignore plugins during generation
    plugins: [ 'upload', 'users-permissions'],
    path: '/documentation',
  },
  servers: [{ url: 'http://localhost:1337/api/api', description: 'Development server' }],
  externalDocs: {
    description: 'Find out more',
    url: 'https://docs.strapi.io/developer-docs/latest/getting-started/introduction.html'
  },
  security: [ { bearerAuth: [] } ]
}
```

### Create a new version of the documentation

> To create a new version of your documentation, update the `version` key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a new version of your documentation, update the `version` key as follows:
```

```js title="config/plugin.js"

module.exports = {
  documentation: {
    enabled: true,
    config: {
      info: { version: "2.0.0" },
    },
  },
};
```

### Indicate which plugins need documentation generated

> If you want plugins to be included in documentation generation they should be included in the `plugins` array on the `x-strapi-config`. By default this array is initialized with `["upload", "users-permissions"]`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want plugins to be included in documentation generation, they should be included in the `plugins` array on the `x-strapi-config`. By default the array is initialized with `["upload", "users-permissions"]`.
```

Similarly, if you do not want plugins to be included in documentation generation, provide an empty array.

```js title="config/plugins.js"

module.exports = {
  documentation: {
    enabled: true,
    config: {
      "x-strapi-config": {
        // Default
        plugins: ["upload", "users-permissions"],
        // Custom
        plugins: ["upload"],
        // Do not generate for plugins
        plugins: [],
      },
    },
  },
};
```

## Overriding the generated documentation

### Excluding from generation

If you simply want to exclude certain apis or plugins from being generated you can use the `excludeFromGeneration` found on the documentation plugin’s `override` service in your application or plugin's [`register` lifecycle](http://localhost:8080/dev-docs/api/plugins/admin-panel-api#register).

**`excludeFromGeneration()`**

| Parameter | Type                       | Description                                              |
| --------- | -------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------- |

> | api       | String or Array of Strings | The name of the api/plugin, or list of names, to exclude |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `api`       | String or Array of Strings | The name of the API/plugin, or list of names, to exclude |
```

**Example**:

```js title="Application or plugin register lifecycle"

module.exports = {
  register({ strapi }) {
    strapi
      .plugin("documentation")
      .service("override")
      .excludeFromGeneration("restaurant");
    // or several
    strapi
      .plugin("documentation")
      .service("override")
      .excludeFromGeneration(["address", "upload"]);
  }
}
```

### Providing replacement documentation

> If the documentation plugin fails to generate what you expect, it is possible to replace what has been generated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the Documentation plugin fails to generate what you expect, it is possible to replace what has been generated.
```

> The documentation plugin exposes an API that allows you to replace what was generated for the following OpenAPI root level keys: `paths`, `tags`, `components` .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Documentation plugin exposes an API that allows you to replace what was generated for the following OpenAPI root level keys: `paths`, `tags`, `components` .
```

> To provide an override, use the `registerOverride` function found on the documentation plugin’s `override` service in your application or plugin's [`register` lifecycle](http://localhost:8080/dev-docs/api/plugins/admin-panel-api#register).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To provide an override, use the `registerOverride` function found on the Documentation plugin’s `override` service in your application or plugin's [`register` lifecycle](http://localhost:8080/dev-docs/api/plugins/admin-panel-api#register).
```

| ----------------------------- | ------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| override                      | Object                    | OpenAPI object including any of the following keys paths, tags, components. Accepts JavaScript, JSON, or yaml |
| options                       | Object                    | Accepts pluginOrigin and excludeFromGeneration                                                                |
| options.pluginOrigin          | String                    | The plugin that is registering the override                                                                   |
| options.excludeFromGeneration | String or Array of String | The name of the api/plugin, or list of names, to exclude                                                      |

:::note
Plugin developers providing an override should always specify the `pluginOrigin` options key, otherwise the override will run regardless of the user’s config.
:::

> The documentation plugin will use the registered overrides to replace the value of common keys on the generated documentation with what the override provides. If no common keys are found it will just add the new keys to the generated documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Documentation plugin will use the registered overrides to replace the value of common keys on the generated documentation with what the override provides. If no common keys are found, the plugin will add new keys to the generated documentation.
```

> If the override completely replaces what the documentation generates then you can specify that generation is no longer necessary by providing the names of the apis or plugins to exclude in the options key array `excludeFromGeneration`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the override completely replaces what the documentation generates, you can specify that generation is no longer necessary by providing the names of the APIs or plugins to exclude in the options key array `excludeFromGeneration`.
```

> If the override should only be applied to a specific version then the override must include a value for `info.version` , otherwise the override will run on all documentation versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the override should only be applied to a specific version, the override must include a value for `info.version`. Otherwise, the override will run on all documentation versions.
```

**Example:**

```js title="Application or plugin register lifecycle"

module.exports = {
  register({ strapi }) {
    if (strapi.plugin('documentation')) {
      const override = {
        // Only run this override for version 1.0.0
        info: { version: '1.0.0' },
        paths: {
          '/answer-to-everything': {
            get: {
              responses: { 200: { description: "*" }}
            }
          }
        }
      }

      strapi
        .plugin('documentation')
        .service('override')
        .registerOverride(override, {
          // Specify the origin in case the user does not want this plugin documented
          pluginOrigin: 'upload',
          // The override provides everything don't generate anything
          excludeFromGeneration: ['upload'],
        });
    }
  },
}
```

The overrides system is provided to try and simplify amending the generated documentation. It is the only way a plugin can add or modify the generated documentation.

> The documentation plugin’s config also accepts a `mutateDocumentation` function on `info['x-strapi-config']`. This function receives a draft state of the generated documentation that be can be mutated. It should only be applied from an application and has the final say in what the OpenAPI schema will look like.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Documentation plugin’s configuration also accepts a `mutateDocumentation` function on `info['x-strapi-config']`. This function receives a draft state of the generated documentation that be can be mutated. It should only be applied from an application and has the final say in the OpenAPI schema.
```

**`mutateDocumentation()`**

| Parameter                   | Type   | Description                                                            |
| --------------------------- | ------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| generatedDocumentationDraft | Object | The generated documentation with applied overrides as a mutable object |

> **Example:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
